# Additional Thread capabilities

* Thread-Local Variables
    * You will sometimes want to associate per-thread data (such a user ID) with a thread.
      Although you can accomplish this task with a local variable, you can only do so while the
      local variable exists. You could use an instance field to keep this data around longer, but
      then you would have to deal with synchronization.
    * However, Java supplies the java. lang.ThreadLocal class as a simple (and very handy) alternative.
    * Each ThreadLocal instance describes a thread-local variable, which is a variable that
      provides a separate storage slot to each thread that accesses the variable. You can think of
      a thread-local variable as a multi-slot variable in which each thread can store a different
      value in the same variable. Each thread sees only its value and is unaware of other threads
      having their own values in this variable.
    * ThreadLocal is generically declared as ThreadLocal<T>, where T identifies the type
      of value that is stored in the variable.
    * Values stored in thread-local variables are not related. When a new thread is created,
      it gets a new storage slot containing initialValue()'s value. Perhaps you would prefer to
      pass a value from a parent thread, a thread that creates another thread, to a child thread,
      the created thread. You accomplish this task with InheritableThreadLocal.
    * InheritableThreadLocal is a subclass of ThreadLocal. As well as declaring an
      InheritableThreadLocal() constructor, this class declares the following protected method:
      * T childValue(T parentValue): Calculate the child's initial value as a function of
        the parent's value at the time the child thread is created. This method is called from
        the parent thread before the child thread is started. The method returns the argument
        passed to parentValue and should be overridden when another value is desired.

* Timer Framework
    *
