# Synchronizers

Java provides the synchronized keyword for synchronizing thread access to critical
sections. Because it can be difficult to correctly write synchronized code that’s based on
synchronized, high-level synchronizers (classes that facilitate common forms of
synchronization) are included in the concurrency utilities.

* Countdown Latches
    * A countdown latch causes one or more threads to wait at a "gate" until another thread
      opens this gate, at which point these other threads can continue. It consists of a count and
      operations for "causing a thread to wait until the count reaches zero" and "decrementing
      the count."

    * The java.util.concurrent.CountDownLatch class implements the countdown latch synchronizer.
      You initialize a CountDownLatch instance to a specific count by invoking this class's
      CountDownLatch(int count) constructor

* Cyclic Barriers
    * A cyclic barrier lets a set of threads wait for each other to reach a common barrier point.
      The barrier is cyclic because it can be reused after the waiting threads are released. This
      synchronizer is useful in applications involving a fixed-size party of threads that must
      occasionally wait for each other.

    * The java.util.concurrent.CyclicBarrier class implements the cyclic barrier synchronizer.
      You initialize a CyclicBarrier instance to a specific number of parties (threads working toward
      a common goal) by invoking this class’s CyclicBarrier(int parties) constructor.

    * You can also invoke the CyclicBarrier(int parties, Runnable barrierAction) constructor to initialize
      a cyclic barrier to a specific number of parties and a barrierAction that's executed when the barrier
      is tripped. In other words, when (parties - 1) threads are waiting and one more thread arrives,
      the arriving thread executes barrierAction and then all threads proceed. This runnable is useful
      for updating shared state before any of the threads continue.

    * Cyclic barriers are useful in parallel decomposition scenarios, where a lengthy task is
      divided into subtasks whose individual results are later merged into the overall result of
      the task.

* Exchangers
    * An exchanger provides a synchronization point where threads can swap objects. Each
      thread presents some object on entry to the exchanger's exchange() method, matches
      with a partner thread, and receives its partner's object on return.

    * The generic java.util.concurrent.Exchanger<V> class implements the exchanger
      synchronizer. You can initialize an exchanger by invoking the Exchanger() constructor.

    * To perform an exchange, invoke V exchange(V x) method. It means Wait for another thread to arrive at this
      exchange point (unless the calling thread is interrupted), and then transfer the given object to it,
      receiving the other thread's object in return. If another thread is already waiting at the exchange point,
      it's resumed for thread-scheduling purposes and receives the object passed in by the calling thread.
      The current thread returns immediately, receiving the object passed to the exchanger by the other thread.

* Semaphores
    * A semaphore maintains a set of permits for restricting the number of threads that can
      access a limited resource. A thread attempting to acquire a permit when no permits are
      available blocks until some other thread releases a permit.

    * Semaphores whose current values can be incremented past 1 are known as counting semaphores,
      whereas semaphores whose current values can be only 0 or 1 are known as binary semaphores or mutexes.
      In either case, the current value cannot be negative.

    * You can initialize a semaphore by invoking the Semaphore(int permits) constructor where permits specifies
      the number of available permits. The resulting semaphore's fairness policy is set to false (unfair).
      Alternatively, you can invoke the Semaphore(int permits, boolean fair) constructor to also set the semaphore's
      fairness setting to true (fair).

      * When the fairness setting is false, Semaphore makes no guarantees about the order in which threads acquire permits.
        In particular, barging is permitted; that is, a thread invoking acquire() can be allocated a permit ahead of
        a thread that has been waiting—logically the new thread places itself at the head of the queue of waiting threads.

      * When fair is set to true, the semaphore guarantees that threads invoking any of the acquire() methods are selected
        to obtain permits in the order in which their invocation of those methods was processed (first-in-first-out; FIFO).

* Phasers
    * A phaser is a more flexible cyclic barrier. Like a cyclic barrier, a phaser lets a group of threads wait on a barrier;
      these threads continue after the last thread arrives. A phaser also offers the equivalent of a barrier action.
      Unlike a cyclic barrier, which coordinates a fixed number of threads, a phaser can coordinate a variable number of threads,
      which can register at any time. To implement this capability, a phaser uses phases and phase numbers.

    * A phase is the phaser's current state, and this state is identified by an integer-based phase number.
      When the last of the registered threads arrives at the phaser barrier, a phaser advances to the next phase and
      increments its phase number by 1.

* Summary
    * Java provides the synchronized keyword for synchronizing thread access to critical
      sections. Because it can be difficult to correctly write synchronized code that's based on
      synchronized, high-level synchronizers are included in the concurrency utilities.

    * Countdown latch: It causes one or more threads to wait at a "gate" until another
      thread opens this gate, at which point these other threads can continue. It consists of a
      count and operations for "causing a thread to wait until the count reaches zero" and
      "decrementing the count."

    * Cyclic barrier: It lets a set of threads wait for each other to reach a common barrier
      point. The barrier is cyclic because it can be reused after the waiting threads are released.
      This synchronizer is useful in applications involving a fixed-size party of threads that
      must occasionally wait for each other.

    * Exchanger provides: It's a synchronization point where threads can swap objects.
      Each thread presents some object on entry to the exchanger's exchange() method,
      matches with a partner thread, and receives its partner's object on return.

    * Semaphore: It maintains a set of permits for restricting the number of threads that
      can access a limited resource. A thread attempting to acquire a permit when no permits
      are available blocks until some other thread releases a permit.

    * A phaser is a more flexible cyclic barrier. Like a cyclic barrier, a phaser lets a group of
      threads wait on a barrier; these threads continue after the last thread arrives. A phaser also
      offers the equivalent of a barrier action. Unlike a cyclic barrier, which coordinates a fixed
      number of threads, a phaser can coordinate a variable number of threads, which can register
      at any time. To implement this capability, a phaser uses phases and phase numbers.
