# The Locking Framework

The java.util.concurrent.locks package provides a framework of interfaces and
classes for locking and waiting for conditions in a manner that's distinct from an
object's intrinsic lock-based synchronization and java.lang.Object's wait/notification
mechanism. The concurrency utilities include the Locking Framework that improves on
intrinsic synchronization and wait/notification by offering lock polling, timed waits,
and more.

* Synchronized And Low-Level Locking
    * Java supports synchronization so that threads can safely update shared variables
      and ensure that a thread's updates are visible to other threads. You leverage
      synchronization in your code by marking methods or code blocks with the
      synchronized keyword. These code sequences are known as critical sections.
      The Java virtual machine (JVM) supports synchronization via monitors and the
      monitorenter and monitorexit JVM instructions.

    * Every Java object is associated with a monitor, which is a mutual exclusion (letting only
      one thread at a time execute in a critical section) construct that prevents multiple threads
      from concurrently executing in a critical section. Before a thread can enter a critical
      section, it's required to lock the monitor. If the monitor is already locked, the thread
      blocks until the monitor is unlocked (by another thread leaving the critical section).
      
    * When a thread locks a monitor in a multicore/multiprocessor environment, the
      values of shared variables that are stored in main memory are read into the copies
      of these variables that are stored in a thread's working memory (also known as local
      memory or cache memory). This action ensures that the thread will work with the
      most recent values of these variables and not stale values, and is known as visibility.
      The thread proceeds to work with its copies of these shared variables. When the
      thread unlocks the monitor while leaving the critical section, the values in its copies
      of shared variables are written back to main memory, which lets the next thread
      that enters the critical section access the most recent values of these variables. (The
      volatile keyword addresses visibility only.)

* Lock
    * The Lock interface offers more extensive locking operations than can be obtained via the
      locks associated with monitors. For example, you can immediately back out of a
      lock-acquisition attempt when a lock isn't available.

    * Acquired locks must be released. In the context of synchronized methods and blocks
      and the implicit monitor lock associated with every object, all lock acquisition and
      release occurs in a block-structured manner. When multiple locks are acquired, they're
      released in the opposite order and all locks are released in the same lexical scope in
      which they were acquired.

    * Lock acquisition and release in the context of Lock interface implementations can
      be more flexible. For example, some algorithms for traversing concurrently accessed data
      structures require the use of "hand-over-hand" or "chain locking": you acquire the lock of
      node A, then node B, then release A and acquire C, then release B and acquire D, and so
      on. Implementations of the Lock interface enable the use of such techniques by allowing
      a lock to be acquired and released in different scopes, and by allowing multiple locks to
      be acquired and released in any order. With this increased flexibility comes additional responsibility.
      The absence of block-structured locking removes the automatic release of locks that occurs with
      synchronized methods and blocks. As a result, you should typically invoke the lock() method
      first then invoke the unlock() method when the lock is able to be released.

* ReentrantLock
    * Lock is implemented by the ReentrantLock class, which describes a reentrant mutual
      exclusion lock. This lock is associated with a hold count. When a thread holds the lock
      and reacquires the lock by invoking lock(), lockUninterruptibly(), or one of the
      tryLock() methods, the hold count is increased by 1. When the thread invokes unlock(),
      the hold count is decremented by 1. The lock is released when this count reaches 0.

    * ReentrantLock offers the same concurrency and memory semantics as the implicit
      monitor lock that's accessed via synchronized methods and blocks. However, it has
      extended capabilities and offers better performance under high thread contention
      (threads frequently asking to acquire a lock that's already held by another thread). When
      many threads attempt to access a shared resource, the JVM spends less time scheduling
      these threads and more time executing them.

    * ReentrantLock implements Lock's methods. However, its implementation of
      unlock() throws java.lang.IllegalMonitorStateException when the calling thread
      doesn't hold the lock. Also, ReentrantLock provides its own methods. For example,
      boolean isFair() returns the fairness policy and boolean isHeldByCurrentThread()
      returns true when the lock is held by the current thread.
