# Concurrent Collections

* Java's Collections Framework provides interfaces and classes that are located in the
  java.util package. Interfaces include List, Set, and Map; classes include ArrayList,
  TreeSet, and HashMap.

* ArrayList, TreeSet, HashMap, and other classes that implement these interfaces
  are not thread-safe. However, you can make them thread-safe by using the synchronized
  wrapper methods located in the java.util.Collections class. For example, you can
  pass an ArrayList instance to Collections.synchronizedList() to obtain a thread-safe
  variant of ArrayList.

* Although they're often needed to simplify code in a multithreaded environment,
  there are a couple of problems with thread-safe collections:

  * It's necessary to acquire a lock before iterating over a collection
    that might be modified by another thread during the iteration.
    If a lock isn't acquired and the collection is modified, it's highly
    likely that java.util.ConcurrentModificationException will be
    thrown. This happens because Collections Framework classes
    return fail-fast iterators, which are iterators that throw
    ConcurrentModificationException when collections are modified
    during iteration. Fail-fast iterators are often inconvenient to
    concurrent applications.

  * Performance suffers when synchronized collections are accessed
    frequently from multiple threads. This performance problem
    ultimately impacts an application's scalability.

* The concurrency utilities address these problems by including concurrent collections,
  which are concurrency performant and highly-scalable collections-oriented types that
  are stored in the java.util.concurrent package. Its collections-oriented classes return
  weakly-consistent iterators, which are iterators that have the following properties:

  * An element that’s removed after iteration starts but hasn't yet
    been returned via the iterator’s next() method won't be returned.

  * An element that's added after iteration starts may or may not be
    returned.

  * No element is returned more than once during the iteration of a
    collection, regardless of changes made to the collection during
    iteration.

* The following list offers a short sample of concurrency-oriented collection types that
  you’ll find in the java.util.concurrent package:

  * BlockingQueue: It's a subinterface of java.util.Queue that also supports blocking
    operations that wait for the queue to become nonempty before retrieving an element
    and wait for space to become available in the queue before storing an element.
    Each of the ArrayBlockingQueue, DelayQueue, LinkedBlockingQueue, PriorityBlockingQueue,
    and SynchronousQueue classes implements this interface directly. The LinkedBlockingDeque
    and LinkedTransferQueue classes implement this interface via BlockingQueue subinterfaces.

  * ConcurrentMap: It's a subinterface of java.util.Map that declares additional indivisible
    putIfAbsent(), remove(), and replace() methods. The ConcurrentHashMap class (the concurrent
    equivalent of java.util.HashMap), the ConcurrentNavigableMap class, and the ConcurrentSkipListMap
    class implement this interface.
