# Fork/Join Framework

* There is always a need for code to execute faster. Historically, this need was met by
  increasing microprocessor speeds and/or by supporting multiple processors. However,
  somewhere around 2003, microprocessor speeds stopped increasing because of natural
  limits. To compensate, processor manufacturers started to add multiple processing cores
  to their processors, to increase speed through massive parallelism.

    * Parallelism: It refers to running threads simultaneously through some combination of
      multiple processors and cores.

    * Concurrency: It's a more generalized form of parallelism in which threads run simultaneously
      or appear to run simultaneously through context switching, also known as virtual parallelism.

* The problem with concurrency is that it doesn't maximize the use of available processor/core
  resources. For example, suppose you’ve created a sorting algorithm that divides an array into
  two halves, assigns two threads to sort each half, and merges the results after both threads finish.

* Let's assume that each thread runs on a different processor. Because different
  amounts of element reordering may occur in each half of the array, it's possible that one
  thread will finish before the other thread and must wait before the merge can happen. In
  this case, a processor resource is wasted.

* This problem (and the related problems of the code being verbose and harder to
  read) can be solved by recursively breaking a task into subtasks and combining results.
  These subtasks run in parallel and complete approximately at the same time (if not at the
  same moment), where their results are merged and passed up the stack to the previous
  layer of subtasks. Hardly any processor time is wasted through waiting, and the recursive
  code is less verbose and (usually) easier to understand. Java provides the Fork/Join
  Framework to implement this scenario.

* Fork/Join consists of a special executor service and thread pool. The executor service
  makes a task available to the framework, and this task is broken into smaller tasks that are
  forked (executed by different threads) from the pool. A task waits until joined (its subtasks
  finish).

* Fork/Join uses work stealing to minimize thread contention and overhead. Each
  worker thread from a pool of worker threads has its own double-ended work queue and
  pushes new tasks to this queue. It reads the task from the head of the queue. If the queue
  is empty, the worker thread tries to get a task from the tail of another queue. Stealing is
  infrequent because worker threads put tasks into their queues in a last-in, first-out (LIFO)
  order, and the size of work items gets smaller as a problem is divided into subproblems.
  You start by giving the tasks to a central worker and it keeps dividing them into smaller
  tasks. Eventually all of the workers have something to do with minimal synchronization.

* Fork/Join largely consists of the java.util.concurrent package's ForkJoinPool,
  ForkJoinTask, ForkJoinWorkerThread, RecursiveAction, RecursiveTask, and
  CountedCompleter classes:

  * ForkJoinPool
  * ForkJoinTask
  * ForkJoinWorkerThread
  * RecursiveAction
  * RecursiveTask
  * CountedCompleter
